README.md, before:

# neolution-prep
## Scripts for preparing neolution-live pipeline input, variant analysis & peptide orders

### Minimal usage example

1. Make project directory and navigate to it in the Terminal
2. Do `git clone git@github.com:schumacherlab/neolution-prep.git` (set up SSH keys or use http instead)
3. **Required**: In the `neolution-prep` directory, create sub-directory `1a_variants` 
	* in it, create sub-directory `vcf` and copy VCF file(s) to it  
4. **Optional**: Create directory `1b_rnaseq_data` in project folder
	* create sub-directory `processed_salmon` or `processed` and copy expression level data to it (for salmon or cufflinks output, respectively)
	* create sub-directory `bam` and copy BAM and BAI file(s) to it (necessary in case you want to determine expression of mutant allele)  
5. Edit the `runConfig.R` file (some vars to check: `userPaths`, `runOptions$varcontext`, `runOptions$neolution`) 
6. Edit the `sample_info.tsv` file. **Make sure to leave tab separation between data!**  
7. Open `prepareNeolutionInput.R`, edit the working directory and run interactively to prepare input files for neo-antigen predictions
8. If all files were generated successfully, run predictions by:  
`nohup nice -n 10 Rscript runPredictions.R > nohup_preds.out &`  
This will start predictions in the background. stdout & stderr will be written to `nohup_preds.out`

#### Example sample info file

| patient_id | dna\_data\_prefix | rna\_data\_prefix | hla\_a\_1 | hla\_a\_2 | hla\_b\_1 | hla\_b\_2 | hla\_c\_1 | hla\_c\_2 |
|:-------------:|:-------------------------:|:------------------------:|:-----:|:-----:|:-----:|:-----:|:----:|:----:|
| TRIAL_ID #1 | 4152\_1\_CF8585\_GATAGACA | 4153\_1\_CF8597\_TTAGGCA | A0301 | A0101 | B0801 | B1601 |  NA  |  NA  |
| TRIAL_ID #2 | 4152\_2\_CF8714\_GCCACATA | 4153\_2\_CF8716\_ACTTGAA | A0201 | A0901 | B3603 | B5201 |  NA  |  NA  |

* The `_prefix` columns should contain the (unique) beginnings of the dna and rna input filenames
* Don't use special characters in HLA allele names (no asterix `*` or colon `:`)  
* Empty cells or NAs can be used to exclude alleles

Commit message:

clarify some steps in data prep

README.md, after:

# neolution-prep
## Scripts for preparing neolution-live pipeline input, variant analysis & peptide orders

### Minimal usage example

1. SSH to the HPC and make a project directory
2. Do `git clone git@github.com:schumacherlab/neolution-prep.git` (set up SSH keys or use http instead)
3. **Required**: In the `neolution-prep` directory, create sub-directory `1a_variants` 
	* in it, create sub-directory `vcf` and copy VCF file(s) to it  
4. **Optional**: Create directory `1b_rnaseq_data` in `neolution-prep` folder, then:
	* create sub-directory `processed_salmon` or `processed` and copy expression level data to it (for Salmon or Cufflinks output, respectively)
	* create sub-directory `bam` and copy BAM and BAI file(s) to it (necessary in case you want to determine expression of mutant allele)  
5. Edit the `runConfig.R` file (some vars to check: `commonPaths`, `runOptions$varcontext`, `runOptions$neolution`) 
6. Fill in the `sample_info.tsv` file. **Make sure to leave tab separation between data!**  
7. Open `prepareNeolutionInput.R`, edit the working directory and run interactively to prepare input files for neo-antigen predictions
8. If all files were generated successfully, start predictions by running the following command from the `neolution-prep` dir in a shell:  
`nohup nice -n 10 Rscript runPredictions.R > nohup_preds.out &`  
This will start predictions in the background. stdout & stderr will be written to `nohup_preds.out`

#### Example sample info file

| patient_id | dna\_data\_prefix | rna\_data\_prefix | hla\_a\_1 | hla\_a\_2 | hla\_b\_1 | hla\_b\_2 | hla\_c\_1 | hla\_c\_2 |
|:-------------:|:-------------------------:|:------------------------:|:-----:|:-----:|:-----:|:-----:|:----:|:----:|
| TRIAL_ID #1 | 4152\_1\_CF8585\_GATAGACA | 4153\_1\_CF8597\_TTAGGCA | A0301 | A0101 | B0801 | B1601 |  NA  |  NA  |
| TRIAL_ID #2 | 4152\_2\_CF8714\_GCCACATA | 4153\_2\_CF8716\_ACTTGAA | A0201 | A0901 | B3603 | B5201 |  NA  |  NA  |

* The `_prefix` columns should contain the (unique) beginnings of the dna and rna input filenames
* Don't use special characters in HLA allele names (no asterix `*` or colon `:`)  
* Empty cells or NAs can be used to exclude alleles
